=pod

=encoding utf8

=head1 NAME

Mojolicious::Plugin::Localize - Localization for Mojolicious


=head1 SYNOPSIS

  # Register the plugin with a defined dictionary
  plugin  Localize => {
    dict => {
      _  => sub { $_->locale },
      -de => {
        welcome => "Willkommen in <%=loc 'App_name' %>!",
        bye => 'Auf Wiedersehen!'
      },
      en => {
        welcome => "Welcome to <%=loc 'App_name' %>!",
        bye => 'Good bye!'
      },
      App => {
        name => {
          -long => 'Mojolicious',
          short => 'Mojo',
          land  => 'MojoLand'
        }
      }
    }
  };

  # Lookup dictionary entries from templates
  %= loc 'welcome'

  # If the user has a preferred locale of 'en',
  # the output is 'Welcome to Mojolicious!'


=head1 DESCRIPTION

L<Mojolicious::Plugin::Localize> is a localization framework for
Mojolicious, heavily inspired by Mozilla's L<l20n|http://l20n.org/>.
Instead of being a reimplementation it uses L<Mojo::Template> for string interpolation,
L<Mojolicious::Plugin::Config> for dictionaries and L<helpers|Mojolicious/helper>
for template functions.

B<Warning!> This is early software and behaviour may change without notifications!


=head1 METHODS

L<Mojolicious::Plugin::Localize> inherits all methods
from L<Mojolicious::Plugin> and implements the following
new ones.

=head2 register

  app->plugin(Localize => {
    dict => {
      _  => sub { $_->locale },
      de => {
        welcome => 'Willkommen!',
        bye => 'Auf Wiedersehen!',
      },
      en => {
        welcome => 'Welcome!',
        bye => 'Good bye!'
      }
    },
    override  => 1,
    resources => ['myapp.fr.dict', 'myapp.pl.dict']
  });

Called when registering the plugin.

Expects a parameter C<dict> containing a localization L<dictionary|/DICTIONARIES>.
Further dictionary files to be loaded can be passed as an array reference
using the C<resources> parameter.

The plugin can be registered multiple times, and defined dictionaries will be merged.

Already existing key definitions won't be overridden in that way
unless an additional C<override> parameter is set to a C<true> value.
Dictionary entries from resource files, on the other hand, will always override,
so the order of the given array is of relevance.

All parameters can be set either on registration or in a configuration file
with the key C<Localize> (loaded only on first registration).


=head1 HELPERS

In addition to the listed helpers,
L<Mojolicious::Plugin::Localize> loads further helpers by default,
see L<quant|Mojolicious::Plugin::Localize::Quantify> and
L<localize-E<gt>locale|Mojolicious::Plugin::Localize::Locale/locale>.


=head2 loc

  # Lookup a dictionary entry as a controller method
  my $entry = $c->loc('welcome');

  %# Lookup a dictionary entry in templates
  %= loc 'welcome'
  %= loc 'welcome', 'Welcome to the site!'
  %= loc 'welcome', user => 'Peter'
  %= loc 'welcome', 'Welcome to the site!', user => 'Peter'

Makes a dictionary lookup and returns a string.

Expects a dictionary key, an optional fallback message and optional stash values.


=head2 localize-E<gt>dictionary

  print $c->localize->dictionary->{welcome}->{en};

Nested helper in the C<localize> namespace.
Returns the merged dictionary hash.

L<Mojolicious::Plugin::Localize> loads further plugins establishing nested helpers,
see L<localize-E<gt>locale|Mojolicious::Plugin::Localize::Locale/locale>.


=head2 localize-E<gt>preference

  # Dictionary:
  # {
  #   '_' => ['de','en'],
  #   '-en' => {
  #     welcome => 'Welcome'
  #   },
  #   'de' => {
  #     welcome => 'Willkommen'
  #   },
  #   'pl' => {
  #     welcome => 'Serdecznie witamy'
  #   }
  # }

  print $c->localize->preference;
  # 'de'

Return the prefered existing key for a given dictionary path.
In case the first level of a dictionary path is a language code
and the preferred keys are the user's preferred locales,
this will return the preferred existing language code for a user.

I<This helper is EXPERIMENTAL!>


=head1 COMMANDS

=head2 localize

  $ perl app.pl localize en pl

Generate a new dictionary template for a certain locale based on an existing dictionary.
See L<Mojolicious::Plugin::Localize::Command::localize|localize> for further information.


=head1 DICTIONARIES

  {
    dict => {
      _ => sub { $_->locale },
      -en => {
        welcome => 'Welcome!'
      },
      de => {
        welcome => 'Willkommen!'
      }
    },
    resources => ['myapp.fr.dict']
  };

  # myapp.fr.dict
  {
    fr => {
      welcome => 'Bonjour!'
    }
  };

Dictionaries can be loaded by registering the plugin either as a passed C<dict> value
or in separated files using the C<resources> parameter.

=head2 Notation

  {
    en => {
      tree => {
        singular => 'Tree',
        plural => 'Trees'
    },
    de => {
      tree => {
        singular => 'Baum',
        plural => 'Bäume'
      }
    }
  }

Dictionaries are nested hash references.
On each level, there is a key that can either lead to a subdictionary
or to a value.

  {
    en => {
      welcome => 'Welcome!',
      greeting => '<%= loc "en_welcome" %> Nice to meet you, <%= $user %>!'
    },
    de => {
      welcome => 'Willkommen!',
      greeting => '<%= loc "de_welcome" %> Schön, Dich zu sehen, <%= $user %>!'
    }
  }

Values are L<Mojo::Template> strings (with default configuration)
or code references (with the controller object passed when evaluating,
followed by further parameters as a hash). In case a string is passed as a scalar
reference, it won't be interpolated as a L<Mojo::Template>.

As you see above, values may fetch further dictionary entries using the L<loc|/loc> helper.
To fetch entries from the dictionary using the L<loc|/loc> helper,
the user has to pass the key structure in so-called I<short notation>, by adding
underscores following they key's path.
The short notation for the entry C<Bäume> in the first example is C<de_tree_plural>.

  %= loc 'de_tree_plural'
  %# 'Bäume'

The short notation can also be used to add new dictionary entries
using dictionary files or the C<dict> parameter of the plugins registration handler.
The following dictionary definitions are therefore equal:

  {
    de => {
      welcome => 'Willkommen!'
    }
  };

  # or
  {
    de_welcome => 'Willkommen!'
  };

There is no limitation for nesting of dictionary entries.
The order in a dictionary is irrelevant as well.

Keys need to contain alphanumeric characters only,
as special characters are reserved for later use.


=head2 Preferred Keys

The underscore is a special key, marking preferred keys on the dictionary level,
in case no matching key can be found on that level
(which is the case when a key in short notation is underspecified).

  {
    welcome => {
      _ => 'en',
      de => 'Willkommen!'
      en => 'Welcome!'
    }
  }

In case the key C<welcome_de> is requested with the above dictionary established,
the value C<Willkommen!> will be returned.
But if the underspecified key C<welcome> is requested without a matching key on the
final level, the preferred key C<en> will
be used instead, returning the value C<Welcome!>.

Preferred keys can exist on any level of the nesting and are always called when
there is no matching key as part of the short notation.

Preferred keys may contain the key as a string, a L<Mojo::Template>, an array reference
of keys (in order of preference), or a subroutine returning either a string or an array
reference.

  # The preferred key is 'en'
  _ => 'en'

  # The preferred key is the stash value of 'user_status' (e.g. 'mod' or 'admin')
  _ => '<%= $user_status %>'
  _ => sub { shift->stash('user_status') }

  # The preferred key is 'en', and in case this isn't defined, it's 'de' etc.
  _ => [qw/en de/]
  _ => sub { [qw/en de/] }

The first parameter passed to subroutines is the controller object,
and the local variable C<$_> is set to the L<nested helper object|/localize>,
which eases calls to, for example,
the L<localize-E<gt>locale|Mojolicious::Plugin::Localize::Locale/locale> helper

  # The preferred key is based on the user agent's localization
  _ => sub { $_->locale }

Preferred keys in I<short notation> have a trailing underscore:

  # Set the preferred key in nested notation:
  {
    greeting => {
      _ => sub { $_->locale },
      en => 'Hello!',
      de => 'Hallo!'
    }
  }

  # Set the preferred key in short notation:
  {
    greeting_ => sub { $_->locale },
    greeting_en => 'Hello!',
    greeting_de => 'Hallo!'
  }


=head2 Default Keys

The dash symbol is a special key, marking default keys on the dictionary level,
in case no matching or preferred key can be found on that level.
They can be given in addition to preferred keys.

  {
    welcome => {
      _   => 'pl',
      '-' => 'en',
      en  => 'Welcome!',
      de  => 'Willkommen!'
    }
  }

In case the key C<welcome_de> is requested with the above dictionary
established, the value C<Willkommen!> will be returned.
But if the underspecified key C<welcome> is requested without a
matching key on the final level, and the preferred key C<pl>
isn't defined in another dictionary, the default key C<en> will
be used instead, returning the value C<Welcome!>.

Default keys can be alternatively marked with a leading dash symbol.

  {
    welcome => {
      _   => 'pl',
      -en => 'Welcome!',
      de  => 'Willkommen!'
    }
  }

To define default keys in I<short notation>, prepend a dash to each subkey in question.

  {
    'welcome_-en' => 'Welcome!',
    'welcome_de'  => 'Willkomen!'
  }

Preferred and default keys are specific to subtrees.
That means in the following dictionary C<loc('title')>
will return the string C<My Sojolicious> for the locale C<en>
and nothing for the locale C<de>, as no matching path is found.
In case there is a list of locales like C<de,en>, the call will
trigger backtracking and return C<My Sojolicious> as well.

  {
    _ => sub { $_->locale }
    en => {
      title => {
        -short => 'My Sojolicious',
        desc => 'A federated social web toolkit'
      }
    },
    de => {
      title => {
        short => 'Mein Sojolicious',
        desc => 'Ein Werkzeugkasten für das Social Web'
      }
    }
  }

To return C<Mein Sojolicious> in case of C<loc('title')> for the locale
C<de>, the second C<short> key needs to be prefixed as well.

=head2 Forcing Preferred and Default Keys

  {
    Lang => {
      _ => [qw/en de pl/],
      -en => {
        de => 'German',
        en => 'English'
      },
      de => {
        de => 'Deutsch',
        en => 'Englisch'
      }
    }
  }

When looking up an entry in the dictionary tree,
the consumption precedence is
C<primary E<gt> preferred E<gt> default>.

But in rare occasions a lookup has to force the
usage of preferred or default keys over primary key access,
for example, in the above dictionary a call to C<Lang_de>,
expecting the value C<German>, will fail, as the C<de> will
be consumed on the second level and will therefore be missing on the third.
To force the usage of the preferred or the default key on the second level,
simply prepend another underscore to the second partial key
(to consume an empty partial key) and call C<Lang__de> with the expected result.


=head2 Hints and Conventions

L<Mojolicious::Plugin::Localize> let you decide, how to nest
your dictionary entries. For internationalization purposes,
it is a good idea to have the language key on the first
level, so you can establish further entries relying on that
structure (see, e.g., the example snippet in L<SYNOPSIS>).

Instead of passing default messages using the L<loc|/loc> helper,
you should always define default dictionary entries.

Dictionary keys should always be lower case, and plugins,
that provide their own dictionaries, should prefix their keys
with a namespace (e.g. the plugin's name) in camel case,
to prevent clashes with other dictionary entries.
For example the C<welcome> message for this plugin should
be named C<Localize_welcome>.

Template files can be registered as dictionary keys to be
looked up for rendering.

  # Create dictionary keys for templates
  {
    Template => {
      _ => sub { $_->locale },
      -en => {
        start => 'en/start'
      },
      de => {
        start => 'de/start'
      }
    }
  }

  # Lookup dictionary entry for rendering
  $c->render($c->loc('Template_start'), variant => 'mobile');


=head1 TODO

=over 2

=item

Support for L<CLDR|https://metacpan.org/pod/Locale::CLDR>

=back

=head1 AVAILABILITY

  https://github.com/Akron/Mojolicious-Plugin-Localize


=head1 COPYRIGHT AND LICENSE

Copyright (C) 2014-2018, L<Nils Diewald|http://nils-diewald.de/>.

This program is free software, you can redistribute it
and/or modify it under the terms of the Artistic License version 2.0.

=cut
